This is a short topic
I want to share with you all.
Hello everyone, my name is Thai.
My topic for today’s lightning talk is
The Magic of Signed Distance Functions.
This is Creative Coding Meetup’s
web page on Eventpop.
And this is the background image used.
Of course, it’s made with code.
But how many lines of code did it take?
I think this image has a lot of effects.
There are gradient, repeating patterns,
and an inner glow effect.
As a web developer, I would think that
using HTML, CSS, Canvas, or SVG
That’s gonna take a lot of code.
But the main logic is only 7 lines.
Before I knew about SDF,
I saw see creating images using very
little code, my jaw dropped.
I’ve never thought that just 7 lines
could create this kind of image.
It was magic to me
until I studied it — and I want to
share it with you all today.
But what is this code?
Let’s take a look.
This code is called Fragment Shader,
written in GLSL language.
It stands for OpenGL Shading Language.
We can write Fragment Shader in VS Code
by using an extension called glslCanvas.
The role of Fragment Shader is to
calculate for each pixel on the screen,
what color the GPU should paint on it.
The input is the glFragCoord variable.
The output is the glFragColor variable.
The GPU will run our code once per pixel.
But since it’s a GPU, it can process
multiple pixels at the same time.
Once the code is run, the color inside
glFragColor will be shown on the screen.
For this image, I used the concept of
Signed Distance Functions.
I think this concept is very powerful.
In this session we will go very quickly.
If you don’t understand
all the details, don’t worry!
My intention is for the details to
pass through your eyes and ears once.
It may help make it easier to understand
when you study in more detail.
Let’s take a look at what it is.
Let’s say we have a shape.
For example, we want to draw this circle.
What we want to draw is called scene.
What is SDF?
SDF is a function that receives a point
and returns a distance between
that point and the scene.
For example, this point
You see that it’s 2 units away
from the edge of the circle.
If our SDF receives this point as input,
it must return a distance of 2.
What about this point?
Audience: 1
Ah! What about this point?
Audience: 0
Okay! What about this point?
Audience: -1
That’s right!
If the point is inside the shape,
the distance is negative.
Hence, *signed* distance.
It can be positive or negative.
So, this is what the SDF function does.
Now, how can we write
the SDF for this circle?
The circle has a centre point *(h,k)*
and a radius *r*.
If we want to know how far a point (x,y)
is from the edge of that circle,
we can use the formula
we learned from school:
x-h squared + y-k squared,
all square rooted
Remember the analytical geometry
class in the fourth grade?
Subtract out the radius,
and you get the SDF for this circle.
But don’t you think that
this formula looks quite scary?
Let’s just simply call
these points C and P.
Then we have a vector CP.
Now we can just write our SDF like this.
It becomes easier to understand —
If the point P is outside the circle,
this CP vector will be
longer than the radius.
The result is a positive number.
But if this point moves inside,
then CP will be shorter than the radius,
and we get a negative number.
As a programmer, using single-letter
name isn’t great for readability.
We should name it in a way
that is easy to understand.
When we write it as GLSL,
we get a code like this.
Finally, if we know the exact
values for the centre and radius,
we can “hardcode” it in
to shorten the code.
That’s all we need.
Now we can represent this circle
with this simple formula.
In Inigo Quilez’s website,
there are many formulas of SDF to study.
You can check them out.
Now that we have the SDF,
what can we do with it?
We can check the value of SDF
at various points
and map the distance to the color
and fill in the color for that point.
If we do the same thing
with the whole picture,
We will get a rendered circle like this.
We can see that a circle can be
represented with a very short code.
The other block of code maps
the distance to the color.
With a distance value,
we can create the desired shading.
The next cool thing about SDFs is that
we can compose them together.
Suppose that we have two circles,
each circle has its own SDF.
This is the distance from A,
and this is the distance from B.
If we find the minimum of two distances,
what do you think will happen?
Audience: Combine?
Yes, we will get this picture.
It’s like the union operation.
How about finding the maximum?
Audience: Intersect?
We will get this picture,
like an intersection.
We can see that many simple SDFs
can be combined with simple operations
to create a variery of images.
For example, if we flip
the sign of the SDF,
the inside and outside will be swapped.
Combine - and max, we get this.
It represents the area in A but not in B.
Do the same thing with the other side,
we will get this picture.
If we subtract from the distance,
the scene will expand.
If we add to the distance,
the scene will contract.
There are many GLSL functions
you can find online
For example, the smoothMin function
is a simple function like min
But when we use it with SDFs,
the edges are more smoothed out.
If we take the absolute value of a
distance and subtract a little from it
the solid scene will become an outline.
In summary, there are
many things we can do.
And as mentioned previously,
we can shade it however we want.
Now let’s draw this picture.
I will start with this small circle A.
And a bigger circle B.
Then I have this vertical bar C.
And a horizontal bar D.
Then I will max C and D together.
What happens?
Audience: Union?
It’s a max operation.
It becomes a square.
This is the picture.
Then I will min E and B.
It will become this picture F.
Then I will make another circle G
but taking the outer area.
And I will intersect it with F.
This is what I get, H.
Finally, I will min H and A.
It will become this shape.
The next cool thing about SDF is
we can transform the picture
by transforming the coordinate system.
You can see the code up here,
p = abs(p)
When taking the absolute
of a point, what happens?
The image in the negative region will
become a reflection of positive region.
Like this.
The next thing is modulo.
It makes points beyond the divisor —
they will wrap around to the other side.
It will make the pattern repeat.
Finally, the line at the top
I rotate the coordinate by 45 degrees.
It will become this picture.
And I will change the color.
Now, I will add inline all the variables.
It will become like this.
That’s all.
Okay, it’s almost the end.
Besides 2D, SDF can be used to
create 3D images through Ray Marching.
But I don’t know how to do it yet.
But on Inigo Quilez’s website,
there is an article about 3D SDFs.
You can check it out.
I show only a little bit on this slide.
The actual article is much longer.
There are so many SDF formulas.
Again I don’t know
how to paint 3D pictures yet
But I’ll recommend several
YouTube channels if you’re interested.
The first channel is SimonDev.
This video goes over
the basics of ray marching,
and using SDFs to render
3D scenes with maths.
You will see that with just an SDF,
you can render scenes with shading,
and light and shadow.
Another channel is CodeParade.
This video shows how to render
3D fractals using SDF and ray marching.
Lastly, Inigo Quilez.
He painted a character and a landscape,
and other pictures using these techniques.
Everything is done with math formula.
No model files or a texture files.
And you can look at the source code.
You can go and check them out.
Inigo Quilez also created a website
called ShaderToy.
You can go to this website
and click on some pictures.
You will see the source code.
You can try to change the source code
and see how it affects the result.
You can use it as a learning tool.
Lastly, there is a #つぶやきGLSL
hashtag on Twitter,
where people show off what they can create
with GLSL code that fits in a tweet.
There are so many cool works.
You can check out this hashtag.
I will put all the links
about this talk on the URL.
That’s all I want to share.
Thank you.